# DevDyn
This repository contains data and code for the results of Milocco, L. & Uller, T. (2024). Utilizing developmental dynamics for evolutionary prediction and control. PNAS. The provided codes are in Python 3.9.

Contents: 
* Folder “ReactionDiffusion” contains the code to generate data for Figure 2 of the paper. The python code gray_scott_Sensitivity.py simulates the spatially-discretized Gray-Scott model and calculates the sensitivity vectors, starting with the initial conditions provided in subfolder SIMULATE. 
* Folder “GRN” contains code and data for the gene regulatory networks results shown in Figures 3 and 4. The script GRN_development.py contains the functions to simulate development of the gene regulatory network.
  + Subfolder “Figure 3” contains the script GRN_predict_mutations.py and GRN_predict_alignment_env_vs_gen.py which were used to generate panels A and B of Figure 3, respectively.
  + Subfolder “Figure 4” contains the data and script to generate Figure 4. Subfolder startingPopulations_UD-LR.zip contains the 15 up-down and 15 left-right populations (total of 30 populations; populations 0, 1, 6, 8, 9, 11, 24, 26, 29, 30, 36, 41, 43, 44 and 47 are the 15 up-down and 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 63, 64, 67, 68, 70, 76, 78, 83, 90 and 92 are the 15 left-right). Scripts GRN_DirectionalPhase_Withinfolder_POOL.py and GRN_directional_evolution_phas_GeneExpressionAsTrait.py take the first 25 individuals of each of the 30 populations as "seeds" to initialize new populations of 1000 clones each; each of these populations of clones are then made to evolve in the two possible directions of the optimum (to the "right" towards (x3,x4)=(12.5,7.5) or "upwards" towards (x3,x4)=(12.5,7.5)). These evolutionary trajectories for 15 generations are shown in Figure 4B. The data for Figure 4C is obtained in an analogous manner, but adding an additional layer of mutation in each generation to some elements of the genetic interaction matrix as explained in the main text. Finally, Figure 4A is generated by introducing environmental perturbations to populations 6 and 57. Figure 4 is generated with script plotFigure4.py.
